# SAMD21 Dev Mini 13664

[Hardware block diagram](./sparkfun%20dev%20mini%20breakout.drawio.pdf)

It's not a complaint, but I ended up *really* sweating over this, because I wanted to understand (a) how the flexible pin assignment works -- the schematic and MCU datasheet made it clear that most of the pins can do any of about five different tasks, but didn't seem to communicate how you might configure these choices -- and (b) what the default assignments are. 

I'd never looked at this kind of board before, so it took some digging to figure out how the (very flexible?) pin assignment works. I consulted the following: 

* https://github.com/sparkfun/SAMD21_Mini_Breakout/blob/master/Documentation/GraphicDatasheet-SamD21MiniV1.pdf

  * I looked at this and panicked: "how am I going to diagram all these options?! which ones of these are the ones that are enabled out of the box!?!"

* https://www.farnell.com/datasheets/1877019.pdf  

  * I was probably too hasty to settle on this datasheet for the MCU rather than look for a newer edition, but okay...

* https://learn.sparkfun.com/tutorials/adding-more-sercom-ports-for-samd-boards/all

  * This led me to learning about the `variant` mechanism for pin assignment
   
* https://github.com/sparkfun/Arduino_Boards/blob/main/sparkfun/samd/variants/SparkFun_SAMD_Mini/variant.cpp 

  * and I was led to this as the official pin assignment file for this board

## What kind of processor is it? 

It's an Atmel SAMD21-G-18-A 32-bit Arm Cortex-M0+ processor which can run up to 48MHz.

## How much Flash and SRAM does it have? Any other memory types? 

The MCU has 256KB of onboard Flash and 32KB of SRAM. There is no other Flash or SRAM fitted to the board.

## Does it have any special peripherals? List 3-5 you find interesting

The embedded SWO peripheral on the board is neat. Otherwise the focus is on soft-configurable MCU ports, which is cool. I'm familiar with the XMOS MCUs which allow you quite a bit of compile-time flexibility to define the chip's pinout. This feels like a friendlier version of that, although I've had a crash course in it over the past six hours and probably don't understand it well yet.

As far as the MCU peripherals are concerned, it'd be fun to get one of these to play around with the timer/waveform generators and see what they can do. It would make an easy build for an audio test generator, I think.

## If it has an ADC, what are its features? 

It looks as though there's a max of twelve channels of ADC available *on this board layout*, depending on how many analogue reference levels you need to consume (there's an internal reference source, allegedly, so you don't have to consume any? I think?). The ADC block looks as though it is quite a bit more powerful than that suggests, though, Differential inputs are interesting, although I can't tell if this board will allow for their use. I don't know a great deal about ADCs.

I haven't been able to satisfactorily reconcile the [board schematic](https://cdn.sparkfun.com/datasheets/Dev/Arduino/Boards/sparkfun-samd21-mini-breakout-v10.pdf?_gl=1*1uojpc3*_ga*MjA5OTIxNjY1LjE2OTY2MjMzNDg.*_ga_T369JS7J9N*MTY5NjY5NjIwNi41LjEuMTY5NjY5Njk3OS42MC4wLjA.) with the [graphic datasheet](https://github.com/sparkfun/SAMD21_Mini_Breakout/blob/master/Documentation/GraphicDatasheet-SamD21MiniV1.pdf) - I'm weirded out by the little comments around e.g. U1 pin 47 ("PB2 is A5", sez the comment, whereas the legend inside the outline of U1 claims PB02 is AIN10).

The ADC has a soft-configurable resolution and sampling rate, and apparently it can tap various internal signals within the MCU, including the DAC output (?!).

## How much does the board cost vs. the MCU? Is the MCU in stock anywhere? 

The dependable SK Pang was [selling these boards for £18](https://www.skpang.co.uk/products/sparkfun-samd21-mini-breakout), but they're all out.

The closest Microchip part (e.g. 256KB Flash, 48 pins, TQFP-48) to the one on the datasheet for this board looks to be the [ATSAMD21G18A-AF](https://uk.farnell.com/microchip/atsamd21g18a-af/mcu-32bit-cortex-m0-48mhz-tqfp/dp/2460543) which lists at £4.21 for qtys above 250, but Farnell only have 735 in total and every other variant is backordered between 1-2 calendar years.
